In this lesson you're going to continue to build out the room a feature of our chat application.
So we learn how to use a socket.
Io rooms in the last lesson.
And we saw that in order to take full advantage of them.
We're gonna need to keep track of which users are in which rooms with which user names.
So in this lesson we're going to focus on setting up a few functions to keep track of our users over
time.
That's going to allow us to start tracking them enjoying it and then access that data later such as
Down below inside of the send message callback where we emit the message or the send location callback
where we emit the location message.
Now I'm excited to get do this and in this video we're mostly going to spend time in a new file writing
the functions necessary to track the users.
Then in the next lesson will integrate those into this file index dot J.S. so first things first inside
of the utilize directory.
I'm going to create a new file called users that's users dot J S and in here we're going to focus on
keeping track of our users in an array so we'll start off by creating a constant users plural.
It's going to start off as an empty array and will add and remove data over time.
In total we'll be creating four functions in this lesson for this file.
The first two will be creating together the first one will be add user allowing us to track a new user.
The second one will be remove user allowing us to stop tracking a user when the user leaves such as
closing the chat room and tab.
Then from there you'll be adding two more.
The first is get user allowing us to fetch and existing users data and the final one.
Get users in Room allowing us to get a complete list of all of the users in a specific room.
And that's going to allow us to eventually render that users list to the sidebar.
So let's go ahead and focus on creating this functions in this file and we'll even call them down below.
Just to make sure they're working.
Then we'll export them and then the next lesson.
Integrate them into the application.
So together we'll start by working through add user so you can get a feel for exactly what we're trying
to do right here.
We're going to accept an object with three properties I.D. user name and room.
Now the user name in room we know where those come from they come from the client I.D..
However that's something that's associated with the individual socket.
So every single connection to the server has a unique I.D. generated for it.
You'll learn how to access that in the next lesson.
For now though we'll just make it up by using a number.
Now you could accept three separate arguments or an object with these on there as properties.
Either way would work just fine.
D user name and room are the properties.
I'm de structuring off of this first and only argument now inside of here.
We're gonna do a few different things and I'll be using comments to keep us organized.
So first step we're going to clean the data so the user name and room those are provided from the client.
We're gonna go ahead and convert them to lower case and trim them up.
Removing any extra spaces and we'll also validate they were actually provided.
So right here I'm gonna start by setting a new value for user name.
It will be the old value but we'll be using trim to remove spaces before and after and I'll also be
using to lower case to make sure that those user names are not case sensitive.
I shouldn't be able to have a upper case A Andrew and a lower case A Andrew as two separate users.
Now we're gonna do the exact same thing for room just down below.
So right here we have the original value.
We're going to trim it and we're going to convert its case and know what we're going to do is see if
those were even provided.
So if they are just empty strings at this point obviously that's a problem.
And the following code will allow us to figure that out.
So validate the data right here.
All we're going to do is set up an if statement this if block will run if the data is invalid.
We're going to see if there's no user name or there's no room.
So right here using the logical not operator with user name or there is no room.
So if either of those don't exist that's a problem the code will run.
And what we're going to do is return an error message that can eventually be shared with the client.
So right here return an object.
We're going to set up this object to have an error property which is a string and we'll provide a good
message for this one.
Something like user name and room are required.
Perfect.
So now that we have this in place we know that we at least have user name and room with some value.
And the next thing we want to do is make sure that the name is unique for that room.
So if I'm joining South Philly and that name is already taken I should not be able to join right here.
We're gonna add a little bit of code to get that done check for existing user.
Now to do this let's go ahead and create a new constant.
We'll set up the variable and we'll use an array method on the users array.
The variable here could be called something like existing user.
So we're looking for an existing user and then we're just gonna use something we've used before users
and a write down find.
So we're trying to find a match.
Now we know we provide that callback function we get access to each user that's in the array already
and it's up to us to return true if we've found the match.
So we're going to return true when the following two conditions have been met.
First up this user needs to be in the same room the person trying to join.
It's okay if there's two Andrews as long as they're in separate rooms.
So right here we're gonna look at the user room property the one that already exists and we're gonna
see if it's equal to the room they're trying to join and using double ampersand.
We want to also make sure that the user name is unique.
So right here user dot user name equals the following the user name up above.
So if both of these are true then return is going to end up returning true.
It will be considered a match and existing user will be populated.
Now that's a problem.
We don't want existing user to be populated.
If it is once again we have an error.
We need to report so the client can respond accordingly right here.
Something like validate user name down below.
If there is an existing user that means that this user can't be added to the same room.
So I'll go ahead and return an object.
Setting up an error property like we did for the other error and we can provide whatever sort of text
makes sense.
In this case it's something like user name is in use seems to make a lot of sense.
Now if the data is valid and we can add them to the room it's time to actually store them so down below
this code right here.
It's only going to run when the user is ready to be stored.
So right here.
Store user.
We are going to create the object Push it onto the array and we're also going to return it.
So right here const user equals.
This is going to be a combination of the I.D. the user name and of course the room.
Then we're going to use this in two locations.
Users dot push is going to push that object onto the array and we'll also going to return it.
I'm going to return an object but instead of adding on the error property for when things go wrong I'll
be setting up the user property for when things go well.
So that's it for this function.
Now I say that's it but it's actually quite complex because there are a few different things that need
to go down.
Now that we have this in place we can go ahead and move on down the list and work on some of the other
functions.
But before we do let's test this and make sure it's working as expected and to test it.
We're just going to call the function a couple of times and make sure everything is getting saved as
expected.
Let's go ahead and create a new user.
So right here I'm going to use ad user and I will provide some valid data to get that array populated.
So for the I.D. we could just say it's 20 to pick any number it doesn't matter for the user name.
We'll go ahead and pick something like our first name.
And then for the room name I'll go ahead and use South Philly for me.
Feel free to use whatever you'd like.
So with all of this in place we can go ahead and console dot log the users array to make sure it contains
what we would expect.
Now let's go ahead and run the file down below I'll use control C to shut down node man.
And for the moment we're just going to run this file as a standalone script before we worry about integrating
it into the project.
So right here that is node space source forward slash utilize a forward slash users dot J S that's going
to run just this file from top to bottom and down below I have my users array with the data inside.
I can see that things have been converted to lower case and if I was to add some spaces around the E
room or the user name I would expect those to go away since we're trimming them.
I'll add some spaces rerun the script and we still have the exact same data which is good.
Now from here let's try to add a second user and test out some of that validation.
So what I'm gonna do is create a constant called R E S which is short for results.
Then I'll go ahead and use add user and what I'm going to do is add a user with the following data right
here that's going to be an I.D. equal to something like thirty three just make it different then we'll
set up a user name as an empty string and a room name as an empty string as well down below.
Oh we're going to do is console dialogue.
The results to make sure we actually get our error back.
Right here.
I'll rerun the script and down below we do get that message user and room are required.
Next up we could try to join South Philly with the exact same name that should fail.
So Andrew and South Philly I will save the program rerun things and I would expect that second error
message right here.
User name is in use.
So far things are working really really well.
We're able to add users and we're also performing the validation necessary to make sure that things
are working as expected.
Now with this in place let's go ahead and continue on to the other function we're going to create together
which is remove user which is going to allow us to remove someone from the users array by their I.D.
once that's done I'll set you free for the challenge.
So right here just above our example code and just below the ad user function I'll create a new constant
I'm gonna call this one remove user and then I'll go ahead and set it up to be a function I'll just
use a standard aero function.
And over here I'm going to accept a single parameter just the I.D. of the user to remove from here.
We're going to attempt to find them in that array and if we find them.
We'll remove them.
I'm gonna start by creating a constant.
And what we're gonna do is try to find the index of a user who has the correct I.D..
So right here we'll end up getting the index back it'll be minus 1 for no match it'll be 0 or greater
if there is a match and the array method we're gonna use is users don't find index find index is very
similar to find which we used above though when a match is found instead of getting the array item back
you get back the position of the array item.
So right here we're gonna call it just like we would call find we provide our function we get access
to the user.
This function still runs for every single user in the users array until the match is found.
And what we're going to do is return true when the user I.D. property equals the I.D. We are searching
for.
Now in this case we can take advantage of the shorthand though you could leave it like this if you wanted
to.
Let's go ahead and use these shorthand syntax that means I'll be removing the curly braces and everything
inside that is user dot I.D. equaling the I.D. parameter.
So now index is a number it's minus 1 if we didn't find a match it is 0 or greater.
If we did so in this case if the following If index is not equal to minus one that means we found a
match.
And what are we gonna do.
We're gonna go ahead and remove it right here.
We'll be doing that by first using return.
We're going to remove the user but we're going to return the user that we remove then we're gonna go
ahead and use users dot Splice.
This allows us to remove items from an array by their index.
So we start with the starting index.
If you wanted to remove the first item it would be zero.
In this case we want to remove the item at the position we found.
So we'll just provide index.
And the second argument is the number of items we'd like to remove.
And in this case we just want to remove one.
Now this right here this is going to return an array because we could remove more than just one item
so it would be an array of all of the items we removed in this case where hard coding is saying we're
only ever going to remove one item and we want to return an object so we'll access the first one by
its I.D..
So right here we remove the item we get back in array we then extract the individual item which is the
user object of the user that was removed and that gets returned.
Now there are other ways to get this done as well.
For example you could have used a filter like we did with the notes application to remove a note.
The disadvantage of that though is that filter would keep running even after it found a match.
This code is a bit faster since find index is going to stop searching once the match is found.
Now that we have this in place let's wrap up the video by testing it out then we'll move on to the next
lesson and we'll you'll create those other two functions.
So down below all I'm going to do is remove the second to user we're creating and that console dialog
and I'm going to attempt to remove this user right here.
So what am I going do.
A new constant removed user.
They don't go ahead and use the remove user function providing that I.D. 22 and down below.
I'm going to console dialog two things.
First up I'm going to log removed user to make sure that we got that back correctly.
And then second up I'm also going to log out the users array to make sure it was actually removed from
the array.
So right here let's go ahead and rerun the program and see what we get.
We can see that we have an array as the value for users.
That's from the console dialog.
Right here we can see we have the object of the user that was removed.
That's from the console dialog online fifty.
And then finally what do we get when we print the users array.
It is an empty array which is exactly what we were hoping for.
So now that we have this in place we're in a really good position to start tracking users.
This video went a little longer than I was hoping it would.
So I'm gonna take the challenge and I'm going to move that in to the next lesson.
I'm excited to get to it.
So let's jump right in.